Translating and Reflecting the Universe:
The Static Shift Problem and Kant’s Argument of 1768

The philosophies of Newton and Leibniz inspired the incompatible absolutist and relationist theories on the structure of space. The Static Shift Problem (SSP) and Immanuel Kant’s handedness argument (KHA) were proposed as real phenomena that require absolute space and cannot be interpreted by a relationist. Yet the proofs are similarly flawed as they deviously assume absolute space in construction.  Instead the proofs backfire, strengthening the case for relational space and, on the grounds of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, contradicting the absolute notion of space.
 
Absolute Space and the SSP/KHA Problem
Absolute space is a three-dimensional Euclidean frame within which all matter is located. This grid exists independent from and unaffected by matter and unchanged through time. Exactly as location and motion can be measured relative to any material objects, “absolute location” and “absolute motion” can be conceived relative to the immovable matrix of space. Yet because the matter is not altered by the space in occupies, it is impossible to experimentally detect these relations to the invisible frame. Therefore, similar to points in an Euclidean plane, every position of absolute space is indistinguishable from all others. “We may not indeed, as Newton himself confesses in the Principia, be able to pinpoint a single one of those absolute positions, and may have to be content to measure with our rulers and clocks the merely relative distances between material things.”  
In contrast, the relationist claims that space is merely the set of relations between objects. Relational space is, “the situation of bodies amongst themselves,” or “an order of coexistences.”  There is no absolute immovable grid within which matter is situated, only the matter itself stationed at some set of distance relations. It makes no sense for a relationist to speak of an empty space–there would be no relations.  Under relational theory there is no preferred absolute location from which to measure position and no fundamental frame against which to determine motion.
The assertions of Clark (SSP) and Kant (KHA) were both intended to, “prove that space has its own reality independently of the existence of all mater and that it is itself the ultimate formulation of the possibility of its composition.”  SSP and KHA are thought experiments that describe the conceptually real phenomena of a new universe under translation and reflection, and then show that they cannot be sufficiently explained by relative space.  “Kant was committed to the idea that ostensive geometrical constructions provide intuitive warrant that can show impossibility.”  Before considering the arguments themselves, we shall examine the notion of a universe and the distance preserving transformations that both SSP and KHA employ.
Congruence is an equivalence relation of objects in space. Two objects are said to be congruent if, “one can be moved (in a rigid manner without stretching) so as to coincide with the other.”  These motions, or transformations, of our space into itself are called isometries because they preserve distance.  This is to say that the distance between any two points in space is invariant under the transformation.  Reflections, translations, and rotations are all isometries of the Euclidean plane—with a little work one can prove that these are the only isometries of the plane.  The Static Shift Problem analyzes a universe congruent under translation while Kant’s Handedness Argument looks at an otherwise exactly similar but reflected universe.

Imagining a New Universe
The universe might be described as the collection of all objects that lie in space, yet to define the universe by its parts seems to be an extremely perilous thing to do. Are ideas, memories, or conscience a part of the universe?  Do they lie in space?  This leads to arguments irrelevant to this paper.  We are able to allow the universe to be an abstract set which need not be defined as simply material or greater.  Much like objects in Euclidean space, we can determine equivalence (congruence) if there exists some sort of rigid transformation which moves one identically onto the other.  If Universe A were placed on top of Universe B, we could determine that they are “the same.”  This might means that each molecule and its corresponding part are moving in exactly the same way or, if this equivalence necessitates, that I also have the same thoughts (brain state?) at the same instant in universe A as in universe B. Either way, since space has no influence on the matter it contains, a distance preserving isometry of space will link congruent universes.  There is no reason why the arguments of Kant and Clark cannot be generalized and brought together under the notion of any isometry of space.  To a relationist, the difference between the two congruent universes will be imperceptible.  Therefore, in order to realize the real difference between the two, absolute space is crucial.

Translate or Reflect the Universe
Imagine a new universe wherein every atom of matter is identical to ours, only shifted as a unit by some constant with respect to the grid.  Similarly imagine a new universe wherein every atom of matter is identical, only reflected across some imaginary plane. The relational properties of distance and relative motion between all corresponding pairs of objects in the two universes are identical.  In fact, the only distinction between the corresponding atoms is its location with respect to absolute space.  Therefore, since all distances between any two points and their corresponding points in the new universes are identical, they are indistinguishable to a relationist.  Moreover because a relationist cannot differentiate any two congruent universes, we can generalize to all possible isometries of the universe.  It appears that a relational theory of space is insufficient to describe these seemingly real differences.
Consider a map of Bowdoin; perhaps the tower lies near the top, the Edward Pols House at the bottom, and the hockey arena on the far left. This map does not describe the position of buildings in absolute space, it renders the relations of buildings on campus to each other. By studying the map an observer can infer that Hyde dorm is 20 steps past Appleton in the direction of the Tower, but not that Sills Hall is located at absolute space coordinate (1,2,1). In this sense, the representation depicted by the map is purely relational.  Now imagine exactly the same map reflected as if seen in a mirror. The distances between any two buildings remain correspondingly identical to the original, yet the hockey arena is now on the far right of the map. According to a relationist, these two maps depict the same thing, yet only one can be correct since if I walk from Edwards Pols to the tower I must either pass the hockey arena on the left or the right.  This is Kant’s “Antirelational argument;” the actual difference between the maps and its reflected image cannot be explained within the context of relationist theory.

A False Assumption Leads to Two False Proofs
SSP and KHA contain a significant blunder that devastate their implications—the very definition of the isometries assume absolute space.  As the proof does not draw the contradiction completely within the bounds of relational theory, its only conclusion is that relative space is incompatible with the absolute notion.  This is not a surprising result and a much easier deduction is as follows: space exists independently of matter in the Newtonian case while empty space is impossible under relational theory.  
Instead SSP/KHA have defined an isometry that is inconsistent with the presupposition of relational space.  “Because the shifts make no ‘practical’ difference, then–contrary to what would be the case were there absolute space–they make no real difference either.”  The universe cannot be translated or reflected with respect to space since space is not an independent sort of object.  Certainly you can translate or reflect objects within the universe about another element or subset of the universe, but not so about space itself.  If such a transformation is made, indeed the set of distance relations remains the same, but so does the universe (since it is indistinguishable).  There is no way that we can step out of the universe and notice a change in direction or location because there is nothing to step up to.  “If two universes are indiscernible, then aren’t they identical, contrary to Newtonian absolutism?”  We can notice no real difference because there is no real difference, and therefore the contradiction of the SSP/KHA problems is defective.
In truth, we have only served to strengthen the case for relativism.  If we trust the relational theory of space we would expect to find that a type transformation wouldn’t make sense in our system.  Moreover, if the same question is considered in absolute space, the irrational arbitrariness of location and orientation is troubling.

The Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR)
Ironically, if we accept the axiom of the PSR, the same argument intended to require absolute space can be reversed to illustrate its contradiction. The Principle of Sufficient Reason claims, “that there ought to be some sufficient reason why things should be so, and not otherwise.”  Because no location or orientation of the universe in the space matrix is preferred, there is no rational reason why the universe should exist as it is in space—any choice would be arbitrary.  To avoid this contradiction to Newtonian space we could deny the PSR, but is another issue all together.
